One consistent pattern at the top of
almost every equity bull market in the
past has been tightening Fed policy
instead of easing policy that we have
today. And then of course, this is a
very small and maybe silly example. But
a couple of years ago, I remember when
the GLP1 drugs were being rolled out,
there was a very brief window where
investors were talking about buying the
airline stocks on the basis that fuel
costs would be lower. Right. [laughter]
>> Yeah. when this narrative, this type of
narrative starts to emerge in my
conversations, uh that's the kind of
time where I think you will be seeing
prices run ahead of earnings, which as I
mentioned has really not been the case.
I'll be a lot more nervous then.
>> That's interesting. So when you just
start to see investors start to justify
things on various bankshot ideas,
>> stretch the narrative.
>> Yeah. And that's that's just sort of
like it's like a behavioral sign that
maybe people are starting to get over
their skis a bit. I think this has been
one of the least enthusiastic markets
that is often described as a bubble uh
in recent history.
[music]
[singing]
>> Hello and welcome to another episode of
the Odd Thoughts podcast. I'm Tracy
[music] Aloway
>> and I'm Joe Weisenthal.
>> We always start these the same with
someone saying it's that time of year
>> and then I say it's the most wonderful
time of year.
>> That's [laughter] right. Uh never never
change
>> 2026 forecast season. It's the outlook
season. It is the moment when every
investment bank um on Wall Street
releases their forecasts for next year.
>> Yeah. And it's a great time. You know,
we make New Year's resolutions the time
of year. We go back. We give we make our
list of top 10 things that happen,
predictions. That's what you're supposed
to It's a quiet time of the year. Often
news gets a little quiet often around
the holidays. So, we make up for it by
just looking back and looking forward.
and then a year later we completely
forget what everyone said about the
current year and we just move on and do
the next year again. That's right.
Always forward looking. Although I do
think, you know, 2026 shaping up to be
an interesting year for a variety of
reasons. Um we just had a CPI number
that came out surprisingly softer than a
lot of people expected. Um some people
say unrealistically softer with 0%
shelter cost increase. So that was
interesting. We're going to have a new
Fed chairman.
>> Yeah.
>> Uh there's still a question mark over
the impact of tariffs, whether we're
waiting to see those show up. And uh
what's going to happen with unemployment
as well that's been ticking up.
>> And then it's been this really
incredible year obviously in the stock
market. I it's the US uh stock market
just continues year after year after
year with a few exceptions here and
there but not many of putting up massive
numbers. And so the question is like can
we expect keep how long is this
realistic especially given you know all
the concerns about concentration and a
handful of names some of which haven't
really been doing so well lately and so
uh yes so many questions on both the
real economy and the uh stock market.
>> Yeah there's definitely been some
dispersion creeping into some of the big
AI names or the tech names. All right
well I'm happy to say we do in fact have
the perfect guests plural. We've got
two. So, we're going to be speaking with
Yan Hatsas. He's the chief economist and
head of research at Goldman Sachs. He's
been on the show a number of times
before and we like talking to him at
least once a year. And Ben Snder, he is
the chief US equity strategist replacing
David Cen. So, thank you both for coming
on all thoughts.
>> Thanks so much for having us. Great to
be here.
>> Is research outlook time is that
actually a quiet time for you guys?
>> It's not a quiet time. Normally we
actually do it about 6 weeks earlier.
>> Yeah.
>> Because
actually November tends to be a little
bit better than December, but because of
the shutdown and the dir of data, we
decided to push it back. It's completely
under our control when we do it. And why
do it at a time when you actually have
much less information than normal? So we
pushed out a number of reports yesterday
including the global economic and
markets outlook.
>> Can you talk the two of you maybe again?
So obviously different roles but on the
same team and obviously the stock
market, US equity market is different
from the economy and you can have years
where the economy is fine, the stocks
are bad and vice versa all different
permutations and combinations. But how
do you think about being in alignment
cross team and so that roughly you're
sort of working under a similar set of
assumptions?
>> Yeah, I can talk about that and not just
with respect to the US or global
economic outlook versus stock market
outlook, but of course there's
currencies, there's em economies,
there's commodities. Certainly on the
macro side, I would say we're on the
coordinated side of the spectrum. We're
not nobody is at one extreme or the
other extreme. You can't have people
that just work alongside one another
without ever talking to one another. But
you also shouldn't have just a machine
where everything is exactly aligned and
there's zero room for individual
initiative. So, but we're we're towards
the coordinator side for sure. a good
time to note to uh listeners. Um we are
recording this December 19th uh 2025.
Ben, how do you think about sort of
working with you know aligning your
views of where markets are going or what
the meaning of the rally has with the
sort of with the macro thinking?
>> There are a number of frameworks to
think about the equity market but a
pretty common one and one we rely on a
lot is to think of the market like a
stock as a discounted stream of future
cash flows. And from that perspective
the most important driver of stocks is
that stream of cash flows is earnings.
And
>> if you break those apart, the most
important driver of those cash flows is
usually the US economy. So we rely very
heavily on Jan's forecast.
>> So in terms of Yan's forecast, I noticed
you're forecasting strong growth as in
GDP, but also rising unemployment. How
do you square those two things?
>> We have flat unemployment at 4 and a.5%,
but it's not going down as you might
think when you're printing, let's say,
2.6% 6% for real GDP in 2020
26. And a small part of the answer is
that that 2.6 probably overstates the
underlying trend a bit because we had
the shutdown that depressed Q4. It's
going to add to Q1.
>> But the more important part of the
answer is accelerating productivity
growth. And we've seen that over the
last five years. The five years since
the pandemic have shown about 2%
underlying trend productivity growth,
the prior cycle was at about 1 and a.5%.
And I think there's reason to believe
that that acceleration is still ongoing
because it probably doesn't have a lot
of AI in it. We expect more of a boost
from AI going forward in the next 5
years than in the last 5 years. And I
think that's got important implications
for the relationship between GDP and
unemployment.
>> So, so obviously like the distribution
of growth matters. It seems to
particularly matter when we're talking
about the stock market because you can
have sectors that are like very quiet,
but then you have these gigantic
companies um that make a ton of money
and capture a lot of the growth that
their stocks do incredibly well. Maybe
it would be helpful even before we get
to the 2026 outlook for the economy.
been like what happened in 2025,
what were the underlying conditions that
allowed for such like another monster
year uh especially for the NASDAQ and a
lot of the big tech names.
>> So to bring it back to earnings, one
thing that happened was really strong
earnings growth. And I think among all
the discussions of bubbles, what's
underappreciated is just how strong
corporate earnings growth has been.
Yeah.
>> Just wrapped up the third quarter season
a few weeks ago and S&P 500 companies in
aggregate reported earnings growth of
12%. Even if we strip out the mega caps,
the median S&P stock reported earnings
growth of about 10%. That's very solid.
>> This is seems to be like an
underappreciated point, which is that
look, yeah, the AIdriven market, the
tech heavy market. It is not just that,
is it?
>> I'll take an extension from this. We
spend a lot of time understandably
talking about the largest stocks in the
market. The top 10 stocks are over 40%
of market cap. We should spend a lot of
time talking about them. But if you look
at the S&P 500 or excuse me, S&P 490 or
493,
that market or that group of stocks has
returned about 15% this year. They
returned about 15% last year. They
returned about 15% the year prior. And
so I understand why we're talking about
the large stocks, but really the broad
US equity market has performed quite
well.
>> Well, how do you account for I guess the
weakness that we've seen in some of the
mega tech stocks in recent weeks? What's
going on there? For three years, we've
been obsessed with AI as a as a market.
And for three years, really the story
has been increased capex,
extraordinarily growth in AI investment
spending. And although we're discussing
a lot the eventual productivity
benefits, as Jan mentioned, really the
trade in the equity market has been the
companies with earnings that are
benefiting from those capex dollars. And
what's happened this year, especially in
the last several months, is it's become
increasingly clear that a probably that
growth will decelerate next year and b
to continue that growth, it's going to
require more debt. And both of those
factors have made investors
understandably uncomfortable. uh Yan,
one of the sort of the sort of the viral
charts of the year or various estimates
of like how much the AI buildout
specifically is a driver of US economic
growth in 2025 and beyond like how much
like you know when you look at the yeah
GDP in 2025 how much of the growth can
you attribute to what Ben just talked
about?
>> Actually pretty close to zero really
pretty close to zero for two for two
reasons. Number one, the
goods that are being invested in in the
AI sector are largely imported. So you
can look at the contribution of
investment spending to GDP growth, but
you if you don't net that out,
>> yeah,
>> against the imports, then you're going
to get the wrong answer. That's that's
one reason. Second reason is that
semiconductors
semiconductors are generally treated as
intermediate inputs.
>> Okay,
>> not as investment. So they don't
actually show up in the uh in in the in
the investment numbers. And so when we
look at the impact of AI investment on
measured GDP growth on the numbers that
are actually being printed, we're
getting only about 20 basis points of
contribution over the last three or four
years and pretty close to zero over the
last year.
>> It strikes me as such an important point
because you know you have other people
estimating, oh 50% of growth this year
is related to the AI build. Are you just
always like banging your head against
the wall? Because you must see these
headlines every day like the rest of us.
>> I I do bet because
oftentimes it's just based on looking at
some portion of investment spending.
Sometimes there are also other things
included in in those calculations that
aren't necessarily AI related. But the
the the big point is that you really
need to look at the imports as well.
Ben, I should just ask before we go any
further, what actually is your 2026
target for the S&P 500? Because we
haven't seen the official outlook yet.
>> We've published 7600.
>> Okay. So, one thing I did want to ask,
this was in YAN's um economic outlook,
but you talk about potentially credit
underperforming, which seems a little
bit strange if interest rates are going
lower and, you know, equities are doing
pretty good. what's going on there.
>> I mean, it's mainly really the uh val
that the valuations are very high. The
credit fundamentals we think are still,
you know, pretty good, but the market is
priced to I mean, not perfection
perhaps, but to a very positive
scenario. And so
>> in that kind of situation, my instinct
would always be to build in a little bit
of mean reversion and that would give
you a modest amount of underperformance,
but I wouldn't say that that's a major
part of our our overall views for for
the next year. I have a question and
it's one of these things maybe it
doesn't fit right into this moment in
the conversation, but I'm so worried
that I'm gonna forget it that I'm gonna
ask it now. So we are recording this
December 19th. We got that CPI report
yesterday came in uh 2.6 on core this is
year-over-year because we didn't have
October data and then there were people
like wait they imputed a 0% zero rent
growth or zero shelter inflation for
October when they didn't collect the
data etc. And but then I'm like okay
that doesn't sound I that doesn't sound
particularly accurate or that doesn't
sound like that sounds a little risky
but on the other hand we're talking
about a year-over-year number so I'm not
even sure why October really affects
that. Can you just before we go any
further explain how I should understand
yesterday's CPI report?
>> Yeah, I mean they use a six-month uh you
know growth rate for for rents and uh
they they did assume a zero sequentially
for October and that does take away from
the year-on-year growth rate as of the
November number as well. So we do think
that shelter inflation in yesterday's
numbers were uh was was understated and
the numbers are not quite as good as the
eight basis points for core CPI on
average for October and November would
suggest
>> so capturing rent is not like measuring
bananas where I could say here's the
price of a banana in November 2025
here's the price of a banana in November
2024 therefore you could just do a
year-over-year thing you can't do that
because they don't they don't do it that
way. They don't look at just one month
and that and and
>> it's also owner's equivalent rent.
>> Well, that's the that's a a separate
point
>> because this distortion affects both
actual rent and owner's equivalent rent.
So, it wasn't as good. And there
probably also were some other
distortions stemming from the fact that
prices were collected in the second half
of November, pretty close to
Thanksgiving, pretty close to the Black
Friday deals, that may have understated
prices in the goods sector. But I think
if you step back and look at the
inflation news more picture, it's pretty
encouraging. We've seen 2025
a meaningful amount of pass through from
tariffs. Uh we think about 50 basis
points of contribution to core PCE
inflation. Core PCE inflation in that
environment has been going sideways.
So if you take out the 50 basis points,
if you think that that's really a price
level effect, that's more like a value
added tax increase and is going to come
out of the numbers in 2026, then we see
an ongoing disinflation to an underlying
rate that's no longer that far away from
2%. And that's pretty good news.
>> Good.
>> Can we talk about prices and tariffs?
And I'm very curious, casting your mind
back to April this year, April 2nd, when
all the tariff announcements came out,
what was your base case for the impact
on inflation? Because there seem to be
two schools of thought. There are people
who think companies are going to use
tariffs as an excuse to raise their
prices and then there are people who
think that tariffs end up being
disinflationary because they basically
take money out of consumers pockets like
a tax.
We had
probably more like a 100 basis points of
of pass through and we ended up I mean
so far I think with about 50 basis
points and there's still a question of
how much of this reflects just a smaller
impact greater absorption maybe by the
business sector um and perhaps to a
small degree by foreign producers
although I actually think that that uh
number is relatively small
>> versus just a different time profile and
a a longer lag. We don't know that yet,
but it's probably some combination of of
the two. The one thing that I think has
been consistent in terms of how we think
about it is that this is more of a price
level effect. And I've seen a lot of VAT
increases in European economies where
VAT rates often move usually upwards
rather than downwards. And we've got
many presidents that have shown, you
know, 12-month increase in in inflation
on the back of one of these tax
increases and then a decline when that
when that gets cycled out.
>> Ben, let's talk about tariffs in the
stock market because if the stock gains
had just been driven by a big bunch of
big tech companies, we say, "Oh, of
course the tariffs didn't matter
because, you know, there's they're not
as tariffs sensitive, etc." But when
we're talking about the fact that the
S&P 493 also did very well, talk to us
like it's not intuitive to me. I would
have guessed crimp margins. I would have
guessed lower sales. All kinds of
things. What did we what did in how did
it all shake out for from the equity
perspectives, the impact of tariffs?
>> This was our concern too, right? Most of
earnings variability is driven by margin
variability. When you have years with
very large earnings growth or very poor
earnings growth, it's usually because of
margins. Yeah. And earlier this year, we
were concerned that in part because of
tariffs, margins would get squeezed and
that would weigh on earnings.
>> It wasn't just you who was concerned
[laughter]
>> and it and it really didn't materialize.
Now, I think part of what we have to
keep in mind is the counterfactual,
right? So, for the last couple quarters,
S&P 500 profit margins have basically
been flat. Well, in an environment of
pretty healthy nominal GDP growth,
normally you would expect some operating
leverage that would cause margins to
expand. And so, I think part of the
story here is you didn't get that
counterfactual. But we've seen
consistently over the last few quarters
companies across earnings calls really
point to three levers they've been
pulling to offset these pressures. One
is of course as Yan mentioned pushing
through some in the form of prices.
Second is both pushing back on suppliers
to absorb some of the costs and
restructuring supply chains where
necessary. And the third is cutting
costs, improving efficiency within
companies. And that ties back to the
slightly better productivity story we've
seen.
So we talked about rising productivity
early and you think that the the main
boost from it is yet to come. Who
actually captures that productivity
acceleration when it comes to the equity
market like the you know the big tech
guys they they've risen quite a lot and
now we're seeing some of the non- tech
companies start to catch up. Who's going
to benefit the most?
>> Well, this is I guess to call it a
trillion dollar question is to
understate the value of this this
question. I think the general consensus
certainly that we have and that most of
our clients have is that AI eventually
will create a very large productivity
boost to the economy that will create
value for someone. Who that someone is
is hard to answer. And as I mentioned
earlier, what the market has been doing
given that uncertainty over the last
couple years is really focusing on
near-term earnings. It's been the
semiconductors obviously. It's been the
hyperscalers to some extent, power
companies, etc. I think that is actually
one of the key differences between this
market and what happened 25 years ago
during the dotcom bubble where we saw
valuations expand quite dramatically as
investors tried to look forward and
guess at the productivity gains and the
economic benefits. Today investors are
saying we saw what happened that time
it's too hard and so what we're really
going to focus on is the earnings today.
>> This is really important. So your view
is that at least from the behavior of
public equity investors, you do not see
any particular element of people letting
their imaginations run wild. Of course,
there are exceptions at the stock level.
Sure.
>> And to some extent, if a stock trades
handinhand with earnings that are
growing dramatically because of AI capex
investment,
>> the implicit assumption is the earnings
from that investment are sustained over
a long period of time. So maybe one
could argue actually the prices should
go up by less than earnings. So I won't
say there's no optimism in the market
with valuations at the current level.
There's clearly optimism, but it's a
very different kind of optimism from
frankly what I expected a few years ago,
which is to Tracy your question,
investors will be asking who are the
long-term winners and trying to pay for
those immediately. That has really not
been the story. I would actually say
that's the key pivot that's happened in
our conversations with clients over the
last few months, which is as this
anxiety has built up about the AI
infrastructure trade. And as for the
first time, we've seen some public
companies discreetly quantify the
earnings boost of AI, the narrative has
shifted from how much will the
semiconductors and other infrastructure
companies make next year to how can we
identify long-term productivity winners.
What would make you nervous when it
comes to valuations in general? This
maybe like indiscriminate investment in
anything that has the word AI in it.
>> That would do it.
>> Yeah. Okay.
>> I think if you look historically, you
know, it's it's hard to quantify
speculative activity or overexuberance,
but we try. And so a few months ago, we
actually built something we call a
speculative activity tra uh indicator.
It looks at trading volumes, for
example, in stocks with no profits,
trading volumes in stocks with
extraordinarily high valuation
multiples. As you might expect, that has
risen this year. But it is comforting to
me that it is still well below levels
that we saw 25 years ago and even 5
years ago in the 2021 experience.
>> Yeah, there's a question. It's not even
really a 2026 question, but you know,
one of the reasons we've always loved
talking to you is I beyond just the
forecast, etc., I consider you to be
sort of a a deep macro thinker with a
rooted in academic ideas. Economists
seem, you know, fairly strict on the
idea that like tech, yes, new
technologies could put some people out
of work, but and that's obviously
painful, but in the aggregate, tech
doesn't destroy jobs. Um, is there any
reason to think that AI would be any
different? I mean, this is what scares
people, right? that there's going to be
10 people who have all the money and the
rest of us are going to be living on
universal basic income. Uh AI may very
well be a good podcast host at some time
like and maybe podcast will go away but
like in the broad thinking is there any
reason to think that somehow this time
it's different with the relationship
between tech and labor?
>> I mean history certainly doesn't support
it from the perspective of the long-term
outcomes. If you look at kind of
intervals of you know 10 20 years you
cannot find a an adverse relationship
between more productivity growth even if
it's more labor productivity growth that
at the industry level puts people out of
work and aggregate unemployment.
What you can find is increases in
frictional unemployment. When you see a
productivity acceleration, it takes a
while for the new jobs to be created in
other industries the to compensate for
the jobs that are being lost in in the
in the affected industries. And we do
build in some of that into into our
forecasts. And then it really becomes a
question of how quickly the adapt the
the the adoption really occurs. if it
happens over say a decade if you look at
the entire economy and you know people
think that's that's way too slow but I
actually don't think it's a it's a crazy
idea to think that this takes a while to
diffuse through the economy not just the
most innovative companies but all
companies and at all levels I I do think
it's going to take a number of years
that would probably give the economy
time to adapt and create jobs in in
other areas is, but if it's if it's much
faster, then I'd be more worried about
short-term increases in frictional
unemployment. So, it's important to keep
an open mind even though I would say my
underlying view is on the optimistic
side that we will be able to cope with
this structural change the way that the
US and world economy has has coped with
technological advancement in the past.
Can you talk a little bit about what's
been going on with consumer spending
because unemployment, you know, getting
a little bit softer, but we haven't
really seen a significant hit to
consumer spending. And yet, if you look
at the sentiment surveys, everyone is
miserable at the moment, but they keep
buying stuff. What is going on there?
I think the sentiment surveys have been
getting less and less useful for
predicting activity and that's true for
the consumer sentiment surveys and the
University of Michigan in particular has
been quite far out of line with what
we've seen but it's actually true more
broadly if you think back to you know 10
years ago 20 years ago just the
importance of the ISM print for markets
and the importance now it's just nowhere
close. We still look at the business
surveys and the consumer surveys because
they have interesting detail. They're
very upto-date but they just don't work
as well as they as they used to or
certainly were were believed to. So I
would really focus more on the hard
data. The hard data would say that the
consumer is doing okay. It's not there
certain consumer spending is certainly
not super rapid. Maybe we'll get to, you
know, 2% or so next year, but I think
consumer spending in real terms is
likely to lag the overall economy. There
are obviously differences between the
top end. I mean the levels obviously,
but also the growth rates towards the
top end versus the the bottom end.
That's a little bit hard to really
assess in real time because the official
consumer spending numbers are not broken
down at a very high frequency in in the
very up-to-date numbers. But it it is a
mixed picture out there. But I would
expect under our forecast for the
economy, I would expect the consumer to
hang in there.
>> What would be your desert island
economic indicator for next year? You're
stuck on an island. You can only look at
one thing to gauge the direction of the
>> It's always beat hard to beat the
unemployment rate.
>> Okay. All right. So, on the unemployment
rate, we should talk about the Fed,
right? Because this time next year,
we're going to have a new Fed chair. Um,
and almost like a year of performance
already. When does he actually come in?
Like April or something? May. Okay.
Well,
>> a significant amount of performance in
the role already. How much of a change
is a new Fed chair when it comes to your
economic forecast?
>> I mean, it's
probably not a lot. We we're, you know,
very unlikely to make a make a forecast
change on the back of an appointment.
And I mean, I don't know who it's going
to be. It's a committee. So there is
more continuity in the in the system
than I think people sometimes believe
when they talk about the the different
potential candidates.
So at least in the say 6 12 18 month
forward horizon I wouldn't really expect
a major change in terms of the policy
outcomes. Obviously, the further out you
go, the more room there is for people to
turn over on the committee. That's true
on the board of governors. It's true
among the Federal Reserve Bank
presidents, and that could have more of
an impact. But in the in the near term,
I would not expect a massively different
outcome because there's a new chair.
Ben, uh, on this note, talk to us about
multiples and obviously you talked about
the importance of earnings obviously and
then how frequently margin expansion is
important, but then there's also the
multiples question. Where are we now in
terms of how you're thinking about
multiples and then when you think where
are we going and how much is that going
to be tied sort of implicitly to
perceptions of uh policy trajectory?
>> Multiple is high. There's there's no
debating that. Certainly if you're
comparing with history, it's high. Okay.
uh in in the last few decades we've
really only seen a higher multiple very
briefly during the postcoid period the
reopening and of course uh in the late
1990s.com
>> in that that the postco is because no
one had made any money for like two
quarters.
>> Well, I think that's a key point which
is one of the things that drives the
multiple higher is expectations of
accelerating or improving earnings.
>> Yeah.
>> And from that perspective, if I listen
to Yan's forecast for a healthy economy
that's improving, it's not necessarily
so strange to me that the multiple is
pretty elevated. The other thing I'd
point out is if we sat here a year ago
or frankly if we sat here at the
beginning of 1999 weren't many podcasts
back then but we'll use our imagination.
The multiple was exactly where it is
today and that didn't really tell you
anything about what to do with the
market over the short term. So I view
valuations
>> through a physics lens as a measure of
potential energy. They tell you a lot
about how much the market can move if
there's a catalyst, but they're not the
catalyst themselves.
I know you talked earlier about how
you're not seeing people um invest in
the AI productivity story
indiscriminately, but when it comes to
an expected productivity boost from this
new technology, what concrete evidence
are you saying that this is actually
happening versus, you know, people
talking their books?
>> Well, about 60% of S&P companies say AI
every quarter on their earnings.
>> True.
>> And you can probably count on one hand
how many are actually quantifying it.
So, I don't think you should expect to
really see it in the numbers today.
Actually, for the first time, we are
modeling an AI productivity boost in our
S&P 500 earnings forecast for next year.
And the magnitude of that boost is under
half a percent. So, we still think even
next year it'll be quite small. But the
important thing is it is growing over
time.
>> But that's the users of uh users of AI
rather than the the investment.
>> Correct. when you're spending hundreds
of billions of dollars in capex, the AI
boost in terms of those dollars has
clearly been large for the last couple
years.
>> So, you're talking about the the
concentration of uh equities within the
S&P 500, very topheavy. How does that
compare with the concentration of
earnings within the S&P 500?
>> That is a key point that is, I think,
often underappreciated, which is 5 years
ago, the top 10 stocks in the market
accounted for a third of market cap.
This was a record at the time although
we look back and think wasn't so bad. Uh
and fast forward now they are a third of
earnings.
>> So one way to conceptualize this is the
market was correctly looking forward
back then and saying earnings are going
to grow. And so today if the top 10
companies are 40% of market cap and a
third of earnings. The question is will
they continue to outperform on an
earnings basis over the next few years?
Well, given the current run rate of
earnings growth, it looks very likely
that the answer will be yes, it'll
outperform. Although on our forecasts,
that gap will shrink a little bit
>> and then markets might look more forward
further than that. And that I mean
that's been part of the the issue for
some of them more recently
>> and that's how you create valuation
problems, right,
>> Tracy? When I hear that big tech
companies only have about a third of the
earnings of the S&P 500, my thought is,
well, that's 70% of all corporate
earnings that they have yet to swallow,
right? Think of all of these earnings
that are acrewing to non tech companies.
All of that is going to be Amazon's uh
Amazon and Alphabet's income in the
future one day.
>> There's still upside.
>> Yeah, there's still 70%. There's still
the majority of money is not being made
by tech companies.
>> Okay. Wait, I got to ask though. Yes,
tech companies have seemed, you know,
very dominant in recent years, but what
would it take to make you a little bit
nervous about the outlook for next year,
the broad market outlook? Like, what
would you need to see to think like, oh,
wait a second, we're kind of getting
ahead of ourselves or I think maybe my
target is a little more optimistic than
I had expected.
>> First, I think an investor should always
be a little nervous. That's a reflection
of equity risk premium which is how the
market generates return over time or at
least part of how the market generates
return over time. Well, first you know
Yan mentioned his desert island
indicator being the unemployment rate.
For me, every Thursday morning I wake up
excited to see jobless claims.
>> This is I've said it many times. I'm a
claims guy when it comes to my desert
island.
>> We're on the same page here.
>> So, you know, if a few Thursdays in a
row we start to see claims rise, I'll
become a lot more nervous. Uh if Jan
walks down the hall one day and says,
you know, we think the Fed's going to
hike at the next meeting, I'll be
nervous about that, too. One consistent
pattern at the top of almost every
equity bull market in the past has been
tightening Fed policy instead of easing
policy that we have today. And then of
course the third is you know this is a
very small and maybe silly example but a
couple of years ago I remember when the
GLP1 drugs were being rolled out there
was a very brief window where investors
were talking about buying the airline
stocks on the basis that fuel costs
would be lower right [laughter]
>> when this narrative this type of
narrative starts to emerge in my
conversations uh that's the kind of time
where I think you will be seeing prices
run ahead of earnings which as I
mentioned has really not been the case
I'll be a lot more nervous then
>> that's interesting so when you just
start to see investors start to justify
things on various bankshot ideas.
>> Stretch the narrative.
>> Yeah. And that's that's just sort of
like it's like a behavioral sign that
maybe people are starting to get over
their skis a bit.
>> I think this has been one of the least
enthusiastic markets that is often
described as a bubble
>> uh in recent history.
>> Um Yan, what happened to housing? And
when I say that, I mean I feel that we
could go a whole conversation talking
about the economy these days without
talking about how mediocre the housing
market is doing. Whether we're talking
about prices, whether we're talking
about starts, basically every measure of
housing, not very good. And yet by and
large in conversations about the
economy, you know, we used to there used
to be the housing cycle is the business
cycle. Even setting aside the crisis of
2008 2009 housing is linked to the
economy has always or for a long time
felt very robust. Has that changed? It's
amazing how if I look back to the well
certainly run up to O 08 and the the
couple years after how we wrote I don't
know 30% 40% 50% of what we were putting
out on housing and the spillovers from
housing and mortgage equity withdrawal
and leverage losses because of mortgage
credit exposures on bank balance sheets
and how it is now such a small part of
the discussion because it's been kind of
a tugof-war I think between you know on
the one hand low vacancy rates and
therefore a supportive supply picture
for housing activity and house prices
and at the same time already high price
levels bad affordability still
reasonably high mortgage rates and it
just hasn't really moved very much. Now,
of course, we've also seen demographic
changes that just result in less housing
turnover. Um, but you know, it is not a
major feature of our outlook for 2026.
We have housing go you know more or less
sideways from here. low positive numbers
for price appreciation and and you know
I think the action is really really
elsewhere more on the investment side
and obviously a lot of the techn
technology issues that we've been
discussing.
>> Um we would be remiss if we didn't talk
about the world's second biggest economy
um which is China. So in your outlook,
it looks like you say you expect China
to hold up well and I think this would
be surprising to a lot of people who
look out at I guess the global trading
sphere and it looks like everyone is a
raid against China in various ways. The
US has imposed tariffs. Europe seems to
want to do something um and possibly you
know form a coherent block I guess
against China. Why haven't we seen more
of a growth hit to China?
The manufacturing sector and Chinese
exports have just held up incredibly
well despite a at times punitive level
of tariffs from the US side. You know,
exports to the US came down
substantially. You know, 25 30% uh on a
year-on-year basis, but exports to other
places have held up very well. Overall,
exports are still up 5 to 10%. They're a
little bit noisy, but very healthy
growth rates. And our expectation is
that that's that's going to continue
mainly because China keeps getting
better and better at producing
better and better goods at cheaper and
cheaper prices. And it's going to be
pretty difficult to really stem that for
other economies. And they also control
the supply of rare earths. they they
control about 70% of the mining, 90% of
the refining. That's a pretty good way
to deter um trade action and and tariffs
and I think we saw that in the
negotiations with the US, but that could
be relevant for other economies that try
to impose tariffs on China. So I think
the goods producing sector is still
going to be strong. Now the flip side is
that the domestic economy is very weak
and that's an that's a country where the
housing story is much more central.
Housing starts and sales are still going
down even though they're already down 60
to 80%. But they they're still going
down steeply. Prices are still falling
steeply. Our China team estimates that
if you take the direct and indirect
effects of property on GDP growth, it
subtracted about two percentage points
in 2025.
And while the worst is probably behind
us, they still have a 1 and a half
percentage point drag next year. So in
that sort of environment we you know we
think China will hold up okay you know
slower growth over time but probably
still closer to 5% than to 4%.
Then uh going back to US stocks I sort
of joke that you know there's 70% of
earnings out there that have yet to be
captured by big tech companies. But I
actually kind of don't really think
that's a joke in the sense that that
does seem to be the trend. There are a
handful of companies that are acrewing a
lot of value. When you think about the
earnings growth that the big tech
companies have the realized earnings
growth and you gave the example about
how you know the market sort of was
correct five years ago that they would
come to represent 30% of earnings. Is
there any historical precedent for the
largest companies in the world to be
growing like this year after year?
Because I used to think mature companies
don't grow like small companies do. Is
this sort of like a novel phenomenon
when you think about the history of
markets? Part of what's fun about
markets is they're always changing. This
seems to be one of those examples. You
know, we did a study last year. We
looked at 100 years of market
concentration in the US.
>> And at least over the last century, we
didn't find anything that quite matches
up to today.
>> Wow.
>> What do you think would actually like
put an end to that market dominance? I
guess stronger antitrust laws or or
what?
>> Yeah. I keep coming back to earnings.
And one way that earnings dominance
could end, of course, is regulatory
policy. uh I think the the top of- mind
question for investors is whether this
revolutionary shift resulting from AI
technology is going to change where the
earnings end up acrewing.
>> Uh but I think almost certainly when one
day we look back if one day we look back
and they were no longer as dominant from
a from a market cap perspective it's
going to be because their earnings
aren't as dominant either. Um, you know,
we started this conversation talking
about the CPI number that came out, and
I would be curious to hear just how
unusual this year has been in terms of
tracking some of the data and dealing
with, you know, things that you probably
haven't had to deal with as an economist
before, like tariffs on, you know, some
tiny Pacific island or something like
that.
>> I would echo what Ben just say said.
It's this is what makes markets and
economic forecasting fun that there's
always something new and of course the
extent of the tariff increases that we
saw on and around liberation day is if
not unprecedented then at least uh we
haven't seen it in many many decades. So
that's that that's a new set of
challenges in terms of figuring out what
the impacts are going to be. It's not as
extreme as what we've seen at times in
the prior 20 years or so. Certainly
compared with COVID. I mean, that's
where you could effectively throw out a
lot of the government data and had to
look for other indicators like cell
phone locations to figure out what was
going on that if not that day, then at
least that week and you know, not uh not
a month
>> a month earlier. So, that that's been a
challenge. The government shutdown, I
would say, has been more challenging
than past shutdowns. Will actually have
holes in the economic data that will
probably be there
>> for ever,
>> forever.
>> And you know, you look at some of the
labor market numbers, we've had a
consistent series for the US
unemployment rate on a monthly basis
since 1948,
except for October 2025.
And that's going to look pretty weird.
>> That's kind of crazy. Uh I don't think
we've asked you yet. What is your
outlook for 2026 in terms of Fed policy?
Where do you see this rate cut cycle
going and how deep?
>> We still have the forecast that we've
had for the last 6 months, which is uh
after the 75 basis points of insurance
cuts in 2025. Two more in 2026. That
bring you down to what we think is
roughly their neutral estimate 3 to 3
and a/4%.
We're penciling that in for March and
June at the moment. Haven't changed
that. I would say there's a pretty
sizable amount of uncertainty around
that. I it's certainly possible that if
you know GDP growth does as well as we
we think and that actually gives a bit
more of a lift to the labor market that
they would wait longer and push that
perhaps into the second half. But I'm
also pretty focused on January 9th when
we get the next employment report
because if that shows another increase
in the unemployment rate then I think it
might be hard not to cut at the January
meeting. We don't have that in the
forecast at the moment, but I think it's
a very real possibility.
>> Something to look forward to after we
come back from the holidays.
>> Currently, I think according to WROP,
it's just a less than 20% chance of a
cut in January, but it sound and I know
you don't expect one, but I guess it
sounds like there's a condition in which
that could jump.
>> Yes, I think so.
>> Yeah. And Ben, thank you so much for
coming on OddLotss, and I guess we'll
have you back on next year.
>> Yeah. Make an annual tradition.
>> Yeah. check your forecasts against
reality. So, thanks.
>> Thank you so much.
>> That was fantastic. Thank you so much.
That was really great.
>> Well, Joe, that's always fun.
>> I love that.
>> I do think the point about, you know,
whether or not we're in a bubble. The
one thing that like does give me some
caution is this idea that like actually
everyone's kind of worried about it at
the moment and people are talking about
>> the down potential downsides. But that
said, I also think back to the internet
bubble, the dot bubble. And I mean,
>> people were so worried about it, they
were writing books about a dot bubble,
right? At the time um before it actually
burst. So I don't, you know, we've had
bubbles before where people have been
worried. Totally. And they're still
bubbles.
>> Totally. Yeah. Merely observing them
does not obiate the existence of one.
>> That's right.
>> Um a couple things. So I I love that Yan
pushed back on this. uh very almost
consensus meme that AI expenditure has
been a huge driver of GDP expansion this
year. And when you talk about I think
you know I think it's it's interesting
to hear him push back so hard on that
given how much of what gets put into the
ground comes out on the other side uh
via imports. I also, you know, look, I'm
I love Ben's point about, yeah, you say
whatever you will about the big tech
companies. They deliver monster earnings
every year. And it's very interesting to
hear how like over the last five years,
you know, look at this crazy
concentration and then they catch up
there to earnings. And it turns out the
market was right again,
>> right? And it's also true, as he pointed
out, that some non- tech companies are
seeing earnings growth, too. So it's not
even a market that's as dominated by big
tech as it was just like two weeks ago.
>> I'm sure that I have contributed at
various times to the sort of meme that
is just a techdriven you know you like
we say that right this techdriven rally
in 2025 and obviously look the NASDAQ
has outperformed the S&P 500 this year.
So we know that like yes tech has
outperformed but you know financials
have done very well. It is in I I hadn't
appreciated how consistently strong the
earnings growth of the S&P 493 had been
over the last three years.
>> I also think this idea of productivity
keeping unemployment stuck at like 4.5%
is an interesting one. Um people I think
tend to think of higher productivity as
a good thing for obvious reasons, but
you know there's so much political um
nervousness at the moment about jobs and
economic security. If we have a massive
productivity boost that ends with people
not having as many good jobs, um that'll
be interesting. I still think it's a
huge question mark obviously like what
AI ultimately means for the labor market
but this idea that like it could raise
the frictional unemployment. So not
necessarily sustained change the number
of people who have jobs but the time it
takes to find a job and various other
things because it's just so economywide
is like maybe that's a useful I think
that's a useful way to think about the
question at least in the short and
medium term.
>> Yeah. All right. Shall we leave it
there?
>> Let's leave it there.
>> Okay. This has been another episode of
the Odd Thoughts podcast. I'm Tracy
Aloway. You can follow me at Tracy
Aloway.
>> And I'm Jill Weisenthal. You can follow
me at the stalwart. Follow our
producers, Carmen Rodriguez, at Kerman
Armano Bennett at Dashbot and Kale
Brooks at Kaleb Brooks.
>> And if you want more OddLotss content,
then check out our daily newsletter. You
can find that at bloomberg.com/odlotss.
>> And you can chat with fellow listeners
247 in our Discord, discord.gg/odlotss.
And if you enjoyed this video, then
please leave us a comment or like or
better yet, subscribe.
>> Thanks for watching. [music]
>> [music]